---
layout: post
title: Qubits
date: 2021-01-26
permalink: qubits-I
---

A *bit* is the unit of information in the computers we use (mobile phones,
laptops, supercomputers etc). A bit can be in two states: $$0$$ and $$1$$.
For convenience, let's call it the *classical bit*.

A *qubit* is the quantum analogue of a classical bit. Qubits are mathematical
objects with specific properties. Like [spin
states](https://twostatesystems.github.io/spin-states-I), they can be
represented as *ket vectors.* These abstract mathematical objects can also be
realised as physical systems that leverage qubits' unique quantum mechanical
properties to build computers that are much more powerful than the best
supercomputers that we have today. Therefore, qubits are not just
mathematical objects; they can be real, physical systems too.

Just like a classical bit, the qubit also has a state. It can be in state 
$$|0 \rangle$$, in state $$|1 \rangle$$, or in a state that is a combination
of the states $$|0 \rangle$$ and $$|1 \rangle$$. Therefore, the most general
state of a qubit is:

$$
\begin{equation}
|\psi \rangle = \alpha\, |0\rangle + \beta\, |1\rangle,
\end{equation}
\label{eq:super-qubit}
$$

where $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ are complex numbers, and 
|$$0 \rangle$$ and |$$1 \rangle$$ are called *computational basis states*. 

The values of $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ are bound by the condition,

$$
\begin{equation}
|\alpha|^{2} + |\beta|^{2} = 1. 
\end{equation}
\label{eq:normalisation}
$$

As we see later in the post, Eq.\eqref{eq:normalisation} has physical significance
too. 

While the states $$|0 \rangle$$ and $$|1 \rangle$$ can be thought to
correspond to classical states $$0$$ and $$1$$, there is no classical
analogue to the state represented by Eq.\eqref{eq:super-qubit}.

Computers routinely determine the state of classical bits. In electronic devices,
the two states of the classical bit correspond to two different voltage ranges.
In magnetic devices, as in the case of magnetic hard drives, the two states
correspond to two different magnetisation of a material. 

If we similalry want to find the state of a qubit, then we must find the
values of $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$. Surprisingly, it is practically
impossible to find these values, which makes it impossible to find the state
of the qubit. We can only get the estimates of $$|\alpha|^{2}$$ and
$$|\beta|^{2}$$ - but not $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ themselves.

What happens when we experimentally examine the state of the quibit?
After measurement, the qubit collapses to one of the basis states, and hence, we find
the qubit to be either in state $$|0 \rangle$$ or in state $$|1 \rangle$$.
The odds of finding the qubit in state $$|0 \rangle$$ is $$|\alpha|^{2}$$ and
in state $$|1 \rangle$$ is $$|\beta|^{2}.$$ We will never find the qubit
in the state $$|\psi \rangle$$.

What does this mean? Does it mean that if we make repeated measurements on the
same qubit, we will get state $$|0 \rangle$$ with a probability of $$|\alpha|^{2}$$ and
state $$|1 \rangle$$ with a probability of $$|\beta|^{2}$$? No, not at all. 

What it means is this: if we have a large ensemble of qubits, all in the same state $$\psi \rangle$$, and if we make
measurements on each of them, we find some of the qubits in stae $$|0\rangle$$ and
some others in state $$|1 \rangle$$. A statistical analysis of our experiment
would show that the odds of finding the qubit in state 
$$|0 \rangle$$ is close to $$|\alpha|^2$$ and in state $$|1 \rangle$$ is 
close to $$|\beta|^{2}$$. 

The probabilities move closer to $$|\alpha|^2$$ and
$$|\beta|^{2}$$ as the number of qubits in the ensemble increases. When we
have an infinitely large number of qubits in the ensemble, all in the same
state $$|\psi \rangle$$, then the probabilities are equal to $$|\alpha|^2$$ and
$$|\beta|^{2}$$. However, the probabilities add up to $$1$$, i.e.
$$|\alpha|^2 + |\beta|^{2} = 1$$, irrespective of the number of qubits in
the ensemble.


**References:**

1. Nielsen and Chuang. *Quantum Computation and Quantum Information*
2. David J Griffiths. *Introduction to Quantum Mechanics*